Master Ryôzan Case: The Forty-second Patriarch, Master Ryôzan, attended Dôan the
Latter. Dôan asked, “What is the thing under the patchrobe?” The master did not
answer. Dôan said, “Not yet to arrive at this state is most bitter for a student
of Buddha. Ask me!” The master asked, “What is the thing under the patchrobe?”
Dôan said, “Intimacy” The master thereupon came to a great enlightenment. Verse:
Where the pure water reaches the deepest depth, the utmost bottom – Without
polishing, it shines clear of itself. Daiyô Myôan Daishi Case: The Forty-third
Patriarch, Daiyô Myôan Daishi, asked the Forty-second Patriarch Ryôzan in all
earnestness, “What is the practice-hall of no-form?” Ryôzan, pointing at an
image of Kannon1, said, “This is a picture painted by Goshoshi2.” The master was
about to say something, when suddenly Ryôzan interrupted him, saying, “That has
form. What is it that is of no-form?”With these words the master came to an
insight. Verse: The round mirror, hanging high, reflects with thorough clarity.
The scarlet ship, however beautifully one tries to paint it, cannot be expressed
at all. Master Tôsu Gisei Case: The Forty-fourth Patriarch, Maseter Tôsu, came
for instruction to Enkan. Enkan showed him an anecdote, “A non-Buddhist asked
Buddha, 'I don't ask for words; I don't ask for no-words'.” Three years passed,
when Enkan asked him one day, “Do you remember that koan? Show me the answer,
I'll check it.” The master was about to say something; just then Enkan covered
his mouth. Thereupon, the master came to clear enlightenment. Verse: The steep
ten-thousand-meter high cliff – unapproachable even for a bird. The blade of a
sword, thin ice – who can walk on it?
